foreign
the best way to measure the team is
dysfunctional is at the end of a meeting
do you feel invigorated or do you feel
depleted
welcome to the art of accomplishment
where we explore how deepening
connection with ourselves and others
leads to creating the life we want with
enjoyment and ease I'm Brett Kistler
here today with my co-host Joe Hudson
[Music]
last week we talked about what makes a
functional team and how to build a
functional team and today let's do a
little bit of the opposite let's talk
about how to build the most
dysfunctional team you possibly can
yeah that sounds fun just to start off
there's this great maybe we can put it
in the show notes there's a great I
don't know how much we'll talk on this
but there's this great thing that the
CIA put out
and I had somebody in the CIA actually
verify it so I know that it's it's
apparently true but I think they put it
out in the 40s or the 50s or something
like that and it was how to go into an
organization and make it dysfunctional
because they were trying to plant people
inside of key organizations of what was
considered an enemy at the time and make
it dysfunctional and it's it's a great
document because when you see it you see
so many organizations are run the way
that they tell you to corrupt an
organization so really cool stuff
yeah what were some of the
characteristics of how they would do
that defer decision making defer
decision making to groups make sure that
the groups that you're deferring the
decision making to are over six
um always try to get everything in the
hands of a committee
you know take away the autonomy of
people who know the the work
stuff like that that sounds about right
exactly yeah when I see like you know uh
oftentimes when I'm working with an
executive for the first time that one of
the first questions I'll ask them is how
many direct reports you have and if they
have
over five it's a red flag if they have
over eight it's I just know there's no
functionality happening or not a great
deal functionality happening in that
organization to have that many direct
reports is just you can't make a
decision it's already incredibly hard to
make a decision yeah the the committee
thing sounds like a lot of non-profits
and like a lot of government yes that
happens in a lot of governments and
non-profits exactly but but also happens
and and way more for-profit companies
than you can imagine yeah
so this is how the CIA would make a
dysfunctional team How would how would
Joe make a dysfunctional team
yeah I might have some things to add
there but before I even begin I want to
tell you a story because I think what
happens with people is they think that
it's a very binary thought process I
have a functional team or I have a
dysfunctional team
and people don't even think about
teamwork unless it's like a an extreme
pain point and I'll give you an example
of this so I recently worked with the
young some chapter of the young
president's organization and
there's some form I don't know all their
technical terms and
and I asked them all before I arrived
what does this group need to go to the
next level
and and it was a group of eight and
these guys were you know CEOs of
companies that are probably market cap
between two three hundred million to two
or three billion dollars so it's that
size of a company and almost all of them
answered with some version of nothing
like we're good everything's cool
you know like I can't think of anything
that we need and if I would have asked
those same people what does your company
need to
to flourish and to take it to the next
level they would have all had an answer
you know whether it be a better
marketing or better people or
more Capital whatever they'd all have an
answer that they would they would be
looking for
and it tells you the mentality behind
teamwork that often happens which is
like either have a functional team or I
don't but it's not like they don't look
at it the way one would say look at
Revenue which is there's always a way to
grow the business there's always a way
to get to more Revenue there's always a
way to increase my mission in the world
those things seem to be
um you know kind of what in Game Theory
they call it an endless game whereas
oftentimes when people think about
functionality teams it's like a game
that has an end it's functional or or
not functional or it's very binary
and I think that that's the first thing
that has to change in a Leader's mind to
really get the optimal team or get more
and more optimal of a team because
there's always room for growth there's
always a way to take the team to the
next level there's always a place to get
more functional so even the idea of a
functional or dysfunctional team I think
it's more of a scale that's just where
are you on the scale and the scale
happens to be endless in both directions
so
super dysfunction can be killing each
other literally and super function can
endlessly go on yeah I could imagine it
can be both and as well you could have
an extremely functional team that
whenever a certain topic comes up
Suddenly seizes up into dysfunction and
then that dysfunction might persist for
a long time under the surface or block
the functionality of an otherwise
functional team that's right that's
right unless it's addressed yeah it's
just like the the transformational
journey or the spiritual journey there's
just no end to it there's just always
ways to refine just I would say like any
Journey but something in our mind you
know we have some sort of artificial
limit on it
and when you can blow that blow your
mind on that when you can say oh
actually there might be like this highly
functional team might be able to get
three times more functional that's when
some really creative and cool stuff
happens and so yeah an interesting
corollary there that you made to
personal transformation uh in in the
transformation process if you stay the
same you will eventually encounter the
reality that breaks your model breaks
your your Consciousness your identity
and requires growth and this must be
true as in as a team as well as a
company grows or as a company shrinks
and how do dysfunctional teams exist and
stay in business yeah that's a great
question so you know a functional team
is one component of making a successful
company you know a great product is
another component
um how much what your margins are is
another component level of the talent in
the room is another component there's so
many things that are are components of a
successful company and then there's also
momentum meaning oftentimes when
companies get dysfunctional like a big
company a Fortune 500 company it can
take years for them to recognize it in
business results
and even when you have those business
results they can last for years before
any actions you know poor business
results can can be there for years
before you know an activist shareholder
comes in or before you get crushed by
your competition
so so you have the momentum and then you
also have the Forgiveness of the company
based to the other strengths and so both
of those can allow for greater levels of
dysfunction so for instance if you are
in a low margin business in a highly
competitive space
where there is a shrinking Market a
total addressable Market
then you are if you're dysfunctional
you're going to be dead really really
quickly as a company
whereas if you are in blue space where
there's no real competition where it's a
super high margin business and the total
addressable Market is growing then you
can be dysfunctional and still succeed
or if you have
um you know a way to keep your
competitors at Bay whether that be with
patents which are less useful these days
or Trade Secrets or distribution
monopolies whatever that is then you can
be more dysfunctional and still survive
how would scale factor into this how do
scale and dysfunction interact yeah well
I would say it's harder to hold a
functional team like to have a
functional team the bigger that the
company grows so that I think that's one
correlation
um it's just it's more difficult because
people are creating functional teams are
hard to replicate and
structures are hard just for people to
operate in that kind of size you know so
there's companies like I think it was
Gore-Tex for a while that every time
they had
part of the company that got over 150
people they would do osmosis and they'd
break it into two at 75 and then they
would grow them to 150 and break it into
two to keep
the number of people that they're
interacting with to a to a pretty
limited number so there's been a lot of
people doing tricks like that but it
just gets challenging the bigger the
company is
but it's definitely not impossible but
otherwise the kind of dysfunction that
can be allowed or that can exist
that doesn't disturb the business is not
really based on scale as much as it is
based on those other components like
margin and product and
and what the market is doing and that
kind of stuff so it's more based on the
requirements of the space that the
company is in the requirements of the
company's business to remain to remain
profitable to exist
and the same dysfunction that might
plague a family business might plague a
large business all the same
or not depending on the differences of
what it's what's required for them to
survive in the market correct like one
of these one of these ways of looking at
it is
like creativity so some companies don't
need to be creative to stay in business
and some companies really need to be
creative to stay in business if your
business is innovation
and dysfunction will kill Innovation
really really quickly it's why very few
big businesses innovate effectively and
if they are they're doing it through
acquisition
and so
you have to be highly effect functional
to continue to iterate successfully and
be Innovative successfully comparatively
highly functional so that's just an
example so if your business requires
that you're going to have to stay
functional if your business doesn't
require that at all then functionality
is is less important to the maintenance
of your business but to the growth of
your business to the flourishing to the
rapid expansion functionality is
is is always helpful and that's the
thing that's interesting is you know for
instance you know great marketing is
always helpful for a business some
businesses don't need the marketing some
businesses do need the marketing but
great marketing is always helpful for
the business it's the same with teams so
if you're really looking to optimize
your company teamwork is a one of the
best levers to pull because it affects
everything else it's like the soil in
which Everything grows in is people's
relationships and their Dynamics
and if you have bad soil it's hard for
anything to grow So speaking of the
dysfunction within a team and how you
know most of most of what goes on in a
company is some reflection of the
consciousness of the the leader or in a
team how can you relate what we're
talking about with teams to the leaders
of them and what do you see in
Dysfunctional leaders so there's a
couple like really big ones like
linchpins that
um if a leader shows these qualities
it's going to be really really hard for
the team
um one is the easiest one to name is
like being political or blame
and what this does is it makes it so
people don't know how to succeed or how
to win
because it's really based on the mood of
the leader and blaming obviously just is
a horrible way to motivate people and it
also doesn't solve anything
so that that's like kind of the obvious
one the less obvious ones are indecisive
leaders super super super bad for a team
like the team loses trust really quickly
if if somebody's indecisive
indecisive doesn't mean that you make
every decision in a Split Second
uh it means that you are you can make
decisions easily or that you don't even
notice their decisions you're not in
that fear-based place of like oh my God
what should I do
um that you're taking the next iterative
step so that's another one uh conflict
avoidant leaders is another huge huge
issue
we are people we have conflict
um avoid the conflict you avoid building
Trust
you avoid uh sorting out the problems
you avoid finding the inefficiencies you
avoid
um seeing the problems that you need to
fix all those things happen if you avoid
conflict
and though on some leave level nobody
wants the leader to come in and go
what the hell is going on here but they
also don't want a leader they can't
trust to do that so
it's oftentimes you see the leaders in
trade the short term
discomfort for the long-term discomfort
and so if you if you're okay with the
short-term discomfort you have a lot
less long-term discomfort
that's a critical piece as well
another one is that they allow defense
or they are defensive themselves and you
know they there's a meeting and one of
the people is really defensive if a
leader allows that to exist that Dynamic
to exist it'll definitely kill a team
because what happens there is that if
someone's getting defensive then people
in the team
if they're super functional they'll be
like hey you're defensive like what's
happening here but if they're not
um then people start being scared to say
things to that person and then
communication gets all gummed up and so
allowing defensive behavior is just
super toxic for a team and you can try
to coach them out of it or you can be
really direct and say wow we don't do
defensiveness here like can you please
leave the meeting until you can come
back in a non-defensive way and show up
lots of ways of handling defensiveness
but it's really critical to make it so
that everybody feels safe and
comfortable sharing whatever it is they
need to share I think it might even be
interesting to do an entire episode
someday on defensiveness and allowing it
and coaching it and just addressing that
in a team because that's a that's a
really big one right there and I can see
how tricky it can be when if somebody's
defensive it's because their nervous
system is seizing up and they're they're
detecting
threat it would be interesting to talk
about how to approach and work with
somebody who's already in threat without
making that threat wrong you know to say
we don't do defensiveness here could be
taken as to say you're not allowed to
feel afraid right now correct yeah or
you help them to say I am afraid right
now instead of being defensive you know
this thing is bothering me or even asked
the question is like oh am I being told
that I've done something wrong what's
what's happening
so there's all sorts of ways around it
to not make it wrong and it's like and
there's a huge difference between we
don't allow defensiveness here which is
in itself defensiveness as compared to
saying like oh hey like I see that
you're being defensive you know this
isn't something that we do here so take
a break
you know get back to yourself come on
back and and we'll continue the
conversation okay so is there anything
else you wanted to touch on with regard
to dysfunctional leaders and then next
I'd love to talk about what do you look
for in a team what to observe when
you're looking for dysfunction yeah I
think the other thing to talk about is
um another thing this is a more subtle
thing but leaders who don't lead or
follow
either one of those can create super
dysfunctional teams so when I mean
follow is that they're actually
listening to the wisdom of their
Executives or the people that they're
working with and
and letting them have authority and
autonomy super important also leading
being the first in taking the
responsibility
having the quote unquote the buck stop
with them being the person who leads the
charge in their own
kind of vulnerability
um not kind of their own vulnerability
their own Wonder their own not knowing
without that kind of leadership it's
it's really hard for a team to be
functional not owning that role of oh I
am the decision maker on these key
components it's less less common but it
happens that would be the other thing
that I would really look for if I'm you
know I get called into places often and
say can you assess this team
and those are that's kind of the
checklist of stuff I look for I guess my
my next question then has shifted a
little bit then from yes from the signs
of a dysfunctional leader what do you
see in a team that has a dysfunctional
relationship with their leader
yeah it's a slightly different question
I mean I recall this time that I was
asked to sit a CEO asked me to come in
and sit with the executive team
and the CEO introduced me for five
minutes I don't know if I've told this
story on the podcast
um they introduced me for five minutes
and then when they handed it over to me
I said so my first question is what
makes it that you're not listening to
the CEO I just watched all of you guys
check out while the CEO was talking so
what's happening there and then I asked
the CEO what made that acceptable and
how like how is it that he's living with
that level of not being heard
so that's that's one example of it but
uh a lot of fear is another example of
it like you definitely see a lot of fear
reactions um a lot of self-protection
and and a reaction to leaders who are
indecisive or not leading or following
or are political or indecisive you just
see a lot of people start protecting
themselves
because when without that trust you
don't have people willing to put
themselves out there you don't have
people willing to
throw in their lot with the teams a lot
instead they start saying what this
team's not going to be successful or I
don't trust it and therefore I'm gonna
I'm gonna throw in my lot with my lot
and take care of myself then continuing
here what are what are some other
examples of just when you're when you're
walking into a team you're looking at
whether it's the leader communicating
with the team or just the team having a
meeting what are the things that you
look for to find areas of dysfunction
that can be improved upon and addressed
yeah so if I hear people talking without
listening to each other like the one I
just described that's a huge sign a
conversation requires both somebody who
wants to talk and somebody who wants to
listen
so that's a huge sign
um generally both in both you know not
just one person yeah that's right and
then also I'd look for who's
participating and who's not and and how
many people are not participating and
kind of what's the distribution of
participation in the conversation
I look for people doing rabbit holes
where everybody gets lost in the example
instead of the higher
on the higher topic that's being talked
about
that kind of level of distraction is
sometimes incredibly useful in certain
kinds of conversations but in execution
conversations really not useful
I look for unclear roles and
responsibilities anytime that I see
something where
at the end of the meeting people don't
know what they're supposed to do at the
end of it if it's a meeting about
execution that's another example of it
means that they they either there's no
accountability or people don't know what
they're supposed to be doing and
I also look for context switching where
like if one person is talking about this
and they're arguing with someone who's
talking about that and they're not even
talking about the same thing and they
don't even recognize that they're not
talking about the same thing
happens all the time
um so that's another one
um teams that prefer talk to action
especially in bigger organizations but
not only where people like to hear
themselves talk but they're not
interested in like making it all happen
and they can get lost in the the thought
instead of in the doing
oh where being right is important that's
a huge one so if I see it so that you
know like people are defending
themselves because they need to be right
that means that they think being right
has something to do with their
value to the business and that's a
horrible thought process yeah that's an
interesting one to zoom in on a little
bit more too because I can see being
right is a personality characteristic
that people bring to a team and it can
also become the culture of the team
correct yes yes that's right it's the
same way if you look at us like a soccer
team if somebody has to be the guy
getting the goal
or a woman has to be the woman getting
the goal in the soccer team
um instead of making sure that the top
soccer team gets the goals that's pretty
much the same thing as being right
and
um in a business where it's about ideas
and relationships
and also being right really hurts having
to be right really hurts relationships
because it's a zero-sum win-lose it
means one person gets it one person
doesn't
and it's also just super ineffective in
the fact that nobody is 100 right no
nobody nobody nobody is 100 right so if
two people disagree on something there's
some sliver of wisdom in both things at
least and if you can combine those two
you've got a better solution than either
one of them alone and so being right
needing to be right totally prevents
those greater solutions from coming to
the surface yeah you're 100 right on
that no I'm not
so what else do we have here then uh I
mean the defensive discussions that we
talked about with the leader the blame
that we talked about with the leader
um I think the other thing that's a more
subtle thing that you can see is people
don't feel accountable for the team they
feel oppressed by or like controlled by
the team dynamic so
super functional teams you'll hear
somebody say
on occasion
wow this meeting is really not working
for me how do we make this meeting work
better you'll hear people say oh the way
this conversation is going doesn't feel
optimal like they're all taking
responsibility for the dynamic of in
which the team interacts rather than
thinking that the leader is responsible
for it you'll also see this in
accountability where the team holds
themselves accountable instead of the
leader being the only person to hold
people accountable
that the team takes responsibility for
their Dynamics instead of just the
leader-taking responsibility for the
Team Dynamics
and if I don't see that then there's
lots of very easy room for growth I can
see there being Dynamics where
a number of members within a team
Identify some dysfunction within the
team and then they decide I'm in a
dysfunctional team there's nothing I can
do
and that contributes to the dysfunction
first Yeah the more accurate thing is I
am participating in a dysfunction and
the thing that the idea that I can't do
anything about it is a great part of the
dysfunction and I don't you never blame
people for that because nobody's given
us the toolbox right it's like okay
you're in a dysfunctional organization
and you're the administrative assistant
to the you know you're low level on this
team nobody's told us like here are the
five moves you can make to
help that team become more functional
right and when they find out what those
five moves are let's use a couple of
examples there like
um say out loud wow this meeting doesn't
feel productive or to say out loud wow I
noticed that people seem to be
interested in getting it right instead
of getting to the best solution or to
say who are the people in the meeting
that should be here and who are the
people in the meeting that shouldn't be
here it's not like a good use of their
time or to say is this meeting a
decision-making meeting or is it a
execution meeting or is it a discovery
meeting you know what what is Our
intention what's the goal of the meeting
those kinds of things some less some
more scary are once scary and and most
people don't know that that will make a
huge difference so once they've done it
a couple times it's a lot less scary
because it's like oh crap that works and
everybody now respects me even more but
most people are scared to say it and or
just don't know to say it yeah and often
when you're when you're in that space
where you're scared to say something and
then you get yourself to say it anyway
it often comes out a little sideways and
then triggers people into defense and
then it proves that it wasn't a good
idea to say and then proves that this is
a dysfunctional team that I can't do
anything about
and there you are again and there you
are again that's right yeah if you're
saying it if you built it up so much and
then you say it with harshness or you
say it with uh with a lack of confidence
you have a good chance of getting
you're getting a sub-optimal result yeah
yeah and so you could actually see a lot
of these characteristics as you know
like the rabbit hole where somebody
wants to be seen in a certain feeling
and maybe they're going down a rabbit
hole into an example
to hide in that example and hope that
the example can prove what they want to
say without them having to fully own it
or the blame which is really saying that
I'm seeing something going on this team
you know that that's not working for me
or that's not that that I see as
dysfunction and
maybe there's a dynamic in the team that
I'm not allowed to be the one who wears
that so it's got to be someone else's
fault a lot of these things that are
dysfunctions are actually
at their core their attempts if
partially occluded attempts at actually
bringing the team into function some of
them are for sure I would say the other
thing that's happening is people like I
can watch a team in the way that I see a
team operate it's like what emotions are
they avoiding and what emotions are they
embracing
and and how are they what are the
strategies that people are using to
embrace or avoid the emotion or to bring
teamwork together or create conflict and
those strategies really will tell you a
tremendous amount about
where the dysfunction lies and what the
root cause of the dysfunction is yeah
which points back to our emotion Series
where the the impulse in the emotion
which is the room in a dysfunctional
team in a dysfunctional meeting will be
dripping with emotion yes that is
unowned somewhere in that emotion is all
suppressed usually suppressed yeah yeah
and somewhere in that emotion is the
entire all the ingredients to bring the
team into functionality yeah and to the
extent that they're suppressed that's
how you see this dysfunctional Dynamic
show up yeah so great example of this
would say let's say you have a leader
who yells at their team as an example
right which I guess is another sign of
dysfunction that people don't usually do
that in front of me but um but let's say
you have that the emotion that is
usually being suppressed is fear or hurt
and aloneness as an example and they
feel that way because they're there's a
stagnation happening that they know will
hurt the company
and so the suppression of that emotion
creates the frustration and the
frustration often drives some sort of
movement the anger drives some sort of
movement which is a surrogate for the
best kind of movement but at least its
movement and so that's a great example
of how
the unfelt emotion turns into a strategy
that is less functional whereas the more
functional approaches wow I noticed that
I have very little confidence that we're
going to succeed and that scares me and
the reason that I have no confidence
that we're going to succeed is because I
don't see movement happening
and I don't want to be a part of a team
where there's no movement happening so
how do we get to movement and how do we
all take responsibility and ownership
for that because I don't want to be the
only person driving this team that's a
completely ineffective use of my time
and it disempowers you guys
that would be that brings me a more
effective approach if you can actually
be in the emotion see what's happening
with you and speak to it yeah so that
brings me into just one one final
question for this episode
what's the most poignant example of when
you saw a team in utter dysfunction
begin a transformation into function oh
that happens like every day well not
every day but every day I'm in the teams
that's that's what happens I think maybe
ant on his episode which is coming up I
think he might have told the story but I
can't remember exactly but it's like
it's a good poignant one where I wear it
in an off site we're doing something and
I was supposed to trigger him on
something and I said
um I said your anxiety is going to kill
the company and everybody in this room
knows it
that's a poignant moment and I'm doing
it with a tremendous amount of Love
um
and and a just a deep truth that allows
everybody to go and relieve including
ant in that moment there's like a sense
of relief because it's like oh the thing
has been called out now we can actually
address it and look at it and and it's
not being considered wrong it's not
being blamed it's not
something that you know
is is makes anybody more or less than
one another
so that would be an example another
example let's see where I've seen that
yeah there's this uh great little thing
that I'm I do with Executives where I
say
I want your goal for the
your goal is in in within a month have
two weeks in a row where every meeting
that you attend you you consider it a
five-star meeting like you rank your
meetings one to five stars and everyone
is a five-star meeting so you that and
that means you feel inspired and
vigorated and energized by the meeting
and you have to do whatever it takes to
do that whatever you need to do like
whether it's telling your you know the
chairman of the board you're not coming
to a meeting or whether it means
um walking out of meetings or whether it
means saying this meeting sucks how do
we fix it whatever you need to do to get
to that place and if a CEO or a leader
commits to that
man that within a month that
organization is completely different
it's like a beautiful little hack to
totally transform
um that thing because it's it's
basically saying I'm not going to put up
with this function because dysfunction
does not I mean that's the best way to
measure it the best way to measure if a
team is dysfunctional is at the end of a
meeting do you feel invigorated or do
you feel depleted
how invigorated do you feel how depleted
do you feel is a great Mark of the
dysfunction
it just hits it right where it lives
yeah I guess my question in that example
is if you have a if you have a leader
in that situation who's avoiding a
certain set of emotions what stops them
from avoiding those particular meetings
and having a lot of other meetings and
saying great I got my five star meetings
and
we're now not paying attention to a
significant issue in the business that's
why I do it for two weeks because
eventually uh the avoid the thing
they're avoiding is going to be put onto
their lap and they're going to have to
deal with it
that's exactly why um with the goal of a
five-star meeting you can't have all
happened meetings and avoid it's just
you can't have all happy meetings and
blame you can't have all happy meetings
or productive invigorating meetings if
you are political it's just it just
doesn't allow for it so the avoidance is
is kind of the last thing that gets
caught but it's it definitely gets
caught the other thing that happens is
when they realize how to the the
techniques of creating a five-star
meeting for themselves they're less
likely to avoid
because they realize it's not the issue
that they're avoiding it's the conflict
that arises around the issue that
they're avoiding right well I think this
is excellent foreshadowing for a future
episode in this series on five star
meetings and meeting culture awesome
all right a pleasure as always and I do
want to make a call out there's a book
called five dysfunctions of a team which
I think is an excellent book there's the
five dysfunctions but they all if I
encourage you to see that all is the
first dysfunction which is a lack of
trust so they talk about things like
accountability and not paying attention
to results and avoiding conflict but all
of that is ways to deteriorate trust but
it's it's told in some in a very very
beautiful way and it's like a story it's
easy to read so I highly recommend the
book if you want to dig deeper in this
topic
thanks for listening to the art of
accomplishment if you enjoyed what you
heard today please subscribe and rate US
on your podcast app we'd love your
feedback so feel free to send us
questions or comments you can reach out
to us join our newsletter or check out
our courses at Art of accomplishment.com
[Music]